Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has caused the largest public health crisis, and economic disaster
of the 21st century so far According to the World Health Organisation
COVID-19 has directly resulted in 4,859,277 deaths worldwide 1 , and its impact on the global economy
has been severe  Policymakers are in urgent need of evidence-based strategies to
contain the pandemic. As Fontanet & Cauchemez  report, one critical mechanism through
which epidemics are controlled is through herd immunity. Herd immunity arises when a sufficiently
large proportion of the population achieves individual immunity to an infectious disease such that
the transmission chain of the disease is halted One method of establishing
herd immunity is through vaccination programs  Preliminary
empirical evidence shows that infection detection and vaccination strategies could be critical tools in
subduing COVID-19, for example the study by Aldila, Samiadji, Simorangkir, Khosnaw & Shahzad
 finds COVID-19 vaccines to be effective in Jakarta, Indonesia. Leaders of other countries have
also implemented vaccine programs and the World Health Organisation reports that a total of
6,364,021,792 vaccine doses have been administered globally as of 10 October 2021.
In line with the international approach, South Africa has opted to issue vaccines in addition to social
distancing and lockdown measures. The South African government has stated that it aims to have
67% of the population vaccinated by the end of 2021 . However, many
South Africans are hesitant to get the COVID vaccine; Department of Health  records that
only 25% of South Africa’s adult population has been fully vaccinated as of 11 October 2021. Burger,
Maughan-Brown, Köhler, English & Tameris compiled a report, based on data from wave 5
of the NIDS-CRAM survey, and find that that around 20% of South Africans are concerned that
COVID-19 vaccines are not safe. The report also shows that relatively few people in the sample
registered to be vaccinated within two months after registration opened. Burger, Maughan-Brown,
Köhler, English & Tameris (2021) conclude that a significant portion of South Africans still have to
be convinced to take the vaccine 2 . While there are different ways to encourage vaccine uptake, such
as mandatory vaccination or lump-sum transfers, insights from behaviourial economics could provide
a more cost-effective solution: a vaccine lottery.
This essay proposes a field experiment to investigate whether a vaccine lottery could improve vac-
cination rates in South Africa. The experiment explores the effect of three different lottery types -
standard, regret and referral - on the take up of vaccines. This essay is structured as follows. Section
2 briefly reviews the relevant literature on behavioural economics and health incentives. Section 3
elaborates on the South African context. Section 4 describes the design of the experiment and out-